---
layout: post
title: "UV Usage: run, add, remove"
permalink: /uv-usage/
published: 2024-08-27
tags: development
categories: software python rust
---

I've been moving all my python code over to be managed by [uv](https://astral.sh/uv) in the last few months. With the release of 0.3.x, I've gone from just playing around with it to fully buying into it as my python package manager.

The new release added a whole host of new sub-commands, initially marked as _experimental_, but the label dropped within days. Switching over to use them also meant changing how I was using `uv`, which may mean I was using it the wrong way to begin with.

Below, I'm describing what I've been doing in the hopes it helps make life easier for anyone giving it a whirl.

## Prior usage

Before the new release, I was basically using `uv` as a sort of `pip` and `venv` replacement. I'd use it to create my virtual environment and then `pip install` any dependencies into it. On my system it was so much faster that using it meant it basically got out of the way of actual development. It's minor, but that feeling of instant response felt magical.

Those commands, `uv pip` and `uv venv` still work, but with the new workflow they feel almost redundant. I suppose for managing existing projects they still have a place, since you can use `uv` immediately without having to change anything from a project that was set up using traditional `pip` and `venv`.

## New workflow

Switching to the new commands meant changing the way I looked at a project. I'll explain by working backwards, which I think will also help explain why anyone would want to bother doing it at all.

### `uv run`

In a project managed by `uv`, the `run` command is the workhorse. It allows running any tool or part of the program with the environment fully set up as needed. For example, with [zpdatafetch](https://pypi.org/project/zpdatafetch/) I have a binary named `zpdata` which acts as a wrapper to provide access to all the library functions from the command-line. This helps both for ad-hoc data checks and for checking that the library still does what is expected while in development.

With `uv run` there is no need to `pip install` the package or alternatively, update the PYTHONPATH to include the local directory. Instead, I can simply use `uv run zpdata ...` and uv takes care of managing the library path and even the binary search path to make sure I pick up the local copy.

It works just as well for wrapping `pytest` so that running tests quickly is simple from the start of the project. Previously, I'd have used `make` or `doit` to make sure I had a quick command that did this, but now it's just there 'for free' with `uv`.

### `uv add` and `uv remove`

Speaking of `pytest` - uv also changes the approach to managing dependencies of the project. In doing so, it finally supports the split of prod and dev dependencies as well. Instead of `pip install` or `uv pip install` the new workflow expects you to `uv add <package>`. This still uses `uv`'s hyper-fast magic to set the package up in your environment. For packages like `pytest` adding the `--dev` flag will keep it separate in the dev dependencies.

For [zpdatafetch](https://pypi.org/project/zpdatafetch/) this means initial setup is now:

```shell
uv add beautifulsoup4 httpx lxml keychain
uv add --dev pytest ruff setuptools build wheel
```

Of course, that's not needed in practice because all those dependencies are now captured in the `pyproject.toml` file. So unless something's changing, there's no need to run them. On initial `git clone` of the repository, it's possible to install them with `uv sync` or even just ignore that and go straight to `uv run` which will do the same thing before the first script is run to ensure the environment is consistent.

[Next post](/uv-usage-2/) I update on how I migrated [zpdatafetch](https://pypi.org/project/zpdatafetch/) to `uv` including updating the github actions to use `uv` for build and test before publishing to pypi.
